[blog] Add Masonry Blog Post (#28362)
mui/material-ui: docs/pages/blog/masonry-post.md

---
title: The Journey of Developing MUI Masonry Component
description: The development process of MUI Masonry Component
date: 2021-09-17T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['bennyjoo"]
card: true
---

# The Journey of Developing MUI Masonry Component

## Request from the community

> On August 14th, 2019, a [request](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/17000) for a masonry component was opened. Upvoted by around 200 MUI users, this is one of the most popular component requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Just over two years ago, a [request](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/17000) for a masonry component was opened. Upvoted by around 200 MUI users, this was one of the most popular component requests so far.
```

The key to this implementation is to set the row height to `1px`. This can be done by setting the height of implicit grid rows to `0px` and the row gap to `1px`. In more detail, the following code, `grid-auto-rows: 0; row-gap: 1`, does the job.

The property `grid-template-columns` should change in response to the `columns` prop. For example, if `columns` is `3`, `<Masonry />` will have the following property: `grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr)`. 

The property `column-gap` should change in response to the `spacing` prop. For example, if `spacing` is `2`, `<Masonry />` will have the following property: `column-gap: theme.spacing(2)`. It is worth noting here that `spacing` is a factor of the theme's spacing. You may ask why we only change the `column-gap`. What about the `row-gap`? As we already discussed, `row-gap: 1` should always be held in order for this implementation to work. Otherwise, `<MasonryItem />` cannot span in a multitude of `1px`.

This is pretty much the gem of `<Masonry />`. It is much simpler relative to `<MasonryItem />`, which we are now moving on to look in detail.

### `<MasonryItem />`

> This component is a CSS grid item that wraps around one and only child. Through the use of `React.Children.only()`, we enforce that only one child is passed to the component. MUI users can always create more `<MasonryItem />` to add more children. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This component is a CSS grid item that wraps around one (and only one) child. Through the use of `React.Children.only()`, we enforce that only one child is passed to the component. The developer can always create more `<MasonryItem />` to add more children. 
```

> `<MasonryItem />` receives two special props: `columnSpan` and `defaultHeight`. `columnSpan` is the number of columns taken up by the component, while `defaultHeight`, which is provided for optional server-side rendering, is the initial height of the component. Both props receive a fixed value. Further details can be found in its [API documents](https://next.material-ui.com/api/masonry-item/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<MasonryItem />` receives two special props: `columnSpan` and `defaultHeight`. `columnSpan` is the number of columns taken up by the component, while `defaultHeight`, which is provided for optional server-side rendering, is the initial height of the component. Both props receive a fixed value. Further details can be found in the [API documents](https://next.material-ui.com/api/masonry-item/).
```

---

> title: The Journey of developing the MUI Masonry component

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
title: The journey of developing the new Masonry component
```

> description: Benny Joo recaps the development process of the MUI Masonry component.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
description: Benny Joo recaps the development process of the Masonry component.
```

date: 2021-09-17T00:00:00.000Z
authors: ['bennyjoo"]

> card: true

Reviewer 2: The card.png file is missing

Author: The png file is actually there!

Reviewer: https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/blob/master/docs/public/static/blog/2021-q3-update/card.png

---

## Request from the community

Just over two years ago, a [request](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/17000) for a masonry component was opened. Upvoted by around 200 MUI users, this was one of the most popular component requests so far.

> ![Screenshot 2021-09-15 at 09 13 33](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32841130/133396518-74c7792e-e4bc-403d-aad4-2585a7876206.png)

Reviewer 2: I think that we should 1. host the image, 2. remove this random alt, 3. have the image in high-resolution (x2).

According to the 70 responses to our survey, we learned that, in a masonry, MUI users want to:

- display less than 50 items,
- span multiple columns,
- insert each item in the shortest column.

![Screenshot 2021-09-15 at 09 29 54](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32841130/133398931-a9ee1aa8-11ca-47e7-a356-d051dab30435.png)

![Screenshot 2021-09-15 at 09 29 59](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32841130/133398945-0e3ea284-8d67-47a3-afad-36a95a6f6925.png)

![Screenshot 2021-09-15 at 09 30 06](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/32841130/133398964-059e0faf-d624-472d-8fbb-9b1ede41cce6.png)

With the help of these survey results, we came up with the following requirements:

**Must-have**:

- Items can have arbitrary heights.
- Items should flow horizontally.
- Each item is pushed to the shortest column.

**Should-have**:

- The number of columns, `columns`, and the spacing between items, `spacing`, can be passed into the component.
- Responsive number of columns (breakpoints)
- Responsive spacing (breakpoints)

**Nice-to-have**:

- Server side rendering
- Span multiple columns in a masonry

> - Performance

Reviewer 3: Or add it to the must-have..

> - Performance

Author: Adding it to the must-have sounds like a good idea because I said that our goal was to create a light-weight, performant masonry.

- Logical tab order
- Support for lazy loading/virtualisation

In short, we wanted to build a masonry component that is light-weight enough to be performant and easy-to-use, but solid enough to do its job.

## Two possible solutions: CSS Grid or CSS Flexbox?

Since our goal was to develop a light-weight, performant masonry component, an absolute positioning implementation, which most existing masonry libraries make use of, was not an option. It requires too much JavaScript, and therefore it is likely to be heavy-weight.

This left either CSS Grid or CSS Flexbox, but each came with its own advantages and disadvantages.

**1. CSS Grid + Configuring `grid-row-start` or `grid-row-end`of items**

> The idea is to create a grid container, `<Masonry />`, that contains grid items, `<MasonryItem />`s, each of which contains a child. Then, we compute the height of each child and set the height of its wrapper, `<MasonryItem />`, to this value. This allows every `<MasonryItem />` to be able to have a different height and to be large enough to display its child.

Reviewer 2: AFAIK, we never use the `<`, `>` when we mention the components in the docs.

```suggestion
The idea is to create a grid container, `Masonry`, that contains grid items, `<MasonryItem />`s, each of which contains a child. Then, we compute the height of each child and set the height of its wrapper, `<MasonryItem />`, to this value. This allows every `<MasonryItem />` to be able to have a different height and to be large enough to display its child.
```

x the other cases and the docs: https://mui.com/components/masonry/

One important thing to note is that simply setting a fixed height to `<MasonryItem />` will not do anything. Because it is a CSS grid item, it is constrained to the row height configured in its grid container, `<Masonry />`. So, we should use a property called `grid-row-start` or `grid-row-end`. Both properties span the height of a grid item to a specific number of rows. For example, applying `grid-row-end: span 10` to a `<MasonryItem />` spans its height to amount to 10 rows.

> This means that a `<MasonryItem />`'s height is always a multiple of the row height configured in `<Masonry />`. If the row height is `10px`, the height of `<MasonryItem />` is a multiple of `10px`: `100px`, `110px`, ... and so on. This limitation gives rise to a serious problem. However, there is always a solution, and both the problem and the solution are introduced in the next section.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
This means that a `<MasonryItem />`'s height is always a multiple of the row height configured in `<Masonry />`. If the row height is `10px`, the height of `<MasonryItem />` is a multiple of `10px`: `100px`, `110px`, ... and so on. This limitation rises a serious problem. However, there is always a solution, and both the problem and the solution are introduced in the next section.
```

Would be nice to explain what is the problem

Author: As said, both the problem and the solution are introduced in the next section. I think it is a good idea to link to the section.

Reviewer: "gives rise to" is correct. "causes", while less precise, might be easier for an international audience to follow.

You might mean "raises", but that means to draw attention to a (perceived) problem.

On the other hand, there is an amazing benefit to this implementation: it places a grid item to the shortest column by default. (Spoiler: this isn't the case in the other option). Also, this implementation makes it extremely handy to support the column spanning feature. We can use `grid-column-start` or `grid-column-end` to span the width of a grid item. Both of these advantages lead to less dependence on JavaScript, which meets our goal of making a light-weight component.

> Overall, this approach satisfies all the requirements discussed earlier except for server-side rendering. Still, this implementation seems like a fairly sufficient candidate to me. What do you think? Let's have a look at the other option, and it might be easier to decide.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Overall, this approach satisfies all the requirements discussed earlier except for server-side rendering. Still, this implementation seemed like a fairly sufficient candidate to me. Let's have a look at the other option, and it might be easier to conclude how we came to the final implementation.
```

I would leave all questions and asking feedback/opinions in the end. Otherwise, it looks here like we are still developing the component

On the other hand, it has one serious limitation as mentioned earlier.

> If the row height is `10px`, the height of `<MasonryItem />` is a multiple of `10px`: `100px`, `110px`, ... and so on.

As a result, the heights of items are likely to be tweaked. Because we can't span a part of a row, `span` in `grid-row-end` should always be followed by a whole number. For instance, `grid-row-end: span 10.5` is not possible. Rather, it should be either `span 10` or `span 11`. Let's say that the row height of a masonry is `10px` and the rendered height of an item is `105px`. We can either make it `100px` or `110px`, but not exactly `105px`. This can disturb the experience of our MUI users.

The second approach, **CSS Flexbox + Configuring `order` of items**, has no such limitation, but it does not support the column spanning option.

So, we have some trade-offs here. You can't go wrong with either approach, however, what if this _"item's height should be in multitude of row height"_ limitation of the first approach goes away? The decision making would be much easier then. So, we have found a workaround for this.

> In order to retain the rendered heights of children as much as possible, we can set the height of each row to `1px`. Even if an item has a rendered height of `105px`, we have no problem! We will assign `span 105` to its `grid-row-end` property. Technically, this item is composed of 105 rows. (Spoiler: this leads to another serious problem later...)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In order to retain the rendered heights of children as much as possible, we can set the height of each row to `1px`. Even if an item has a rendered height of `105px`, we have no problem! We will assign `span 105` to its `grid-row-end` property. Technically, this item is composed of 105 rows. (Spoiler: this leads to another serious problem later...)
```

Maybe link to the section where you talk about the problem?

In conclusion, we chose the first implementation: **CSS Grid + Configuring `grid-row-start` or `grid-row-end` of items**.

## Breakdown of MUI Masonry Implementation

As briefly discussed earlier, `<Masonry />` and `<MasonryItem />` are needed to implement a whole masonry component. I will explain behind-the-scenes of each of the two in detail.

### `<Masonry />`

This component is a CSS grid container that wraps around a list of `<MasonryItem />`s. Passing an element or elements other than `<MasonryItem />` will not lead to anything.

> `<Masonry />` receives two special props: `columns` and `spacing`. `columns` is the number of columns for the masonry, while `spacing` is the gap between masonry items. Both props can be a fixed value, such as `3` and `4`, or responsive values, such as `{ xs: 3, sm: 4, md: 5 }` and `[ xs: 3, sm: 4, md: 5]`. Further details can be found in the [API documentation](https://mui.com/api/masonry/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`<Masonry />` receives two special props: `columns` and `spacing`. `columns` is the number of columns for the masonry, while `spacing` is the gap between masonry items. Both props can be a fixed value, such as `3` and `4`, or responsive values, such as `{ xs: 3, sm: 4, md: 5 }` and `[ xs: 3, sm: 4, md: 5]`. Further details can be found in the [API documentation](/api/masonry/).
```

The property `grid-template-columns` should change in response to the `columns` prop. For example, if `columns` is `3`, `<Masonry />` will have the following property: `grid-template-columns: repeat(3, 1fr)`.

The property `column-gap` should change in response to the `spacing` prop. For example, if `spacing` is `2`, `<Masonry />` will have the following property: `column-gap: theme.spacing(2)`. It's worth noting here that `spacing` is a factor of the theme's spacing. You may ask why we only change the `column-gap`. What about the `row-gap`? As we already discussed, `row-gap: 1` should always be held in order for this implementation to work. Otherwise, `<MasonryItem />` cannot span in a multiple of `1px`.

This is pretty much the gist of `<Masonry />`. It is much simpler relative to `<MasonryItem />`, which we are now moving on to look in detail.

### `<MasonryItem />`

This component is a CSS grid item that wraps around one and only child. Through the use of `React.Children.only()`, we enforce that only one child is passed to the component. MUI users can always create more `<MasonryItem />` to add more children.

> `<MasonryItem />` receives two special props: `columnSpan` and `defaultHeight`. `columnSpan` is the number of columns taken up by the component, while `defaultHeight`, which is provided for optional server-side rendering, is the initial height of the component. Both props receive a fixed value. Further details can be found in the [API documentation](https://mui.com/api/masonry-item/).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`<MasonryItem />` receives two special props: `columnSpan` and `defaultHeight`. `columnSpan` is the number of columns taken up by the component, while `defaultHeight`, which is provided for optional server-side rendering, is the initial height of the component. Both props receive a fixed value. Further details can be found in the [API documentation](/api/masonry-item/).
```

> `<MasonryItem />` utilises a Web API called [ResizeObserver API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ResizeObserver). It detects changes to the dimensions of an element. We use this API to observe the child passed to `<MasonryItem />`. Every time the child's height changes, which is commonly caused by window resizing or zooming, these two properties, `grid-row-end` and `padding-bottom`, also get updated. `grid-row-end` changes so that the height of `<MasonryItem />`, by spanning a correct number of rows, matches its child's height. `padding-bottom` changes so that the vertical gap between `<MasonryItem />`s stays correct.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`<MasonryItem />` utilizes a Web API called [ResizeObserver API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/ResizeObserver). It detects changes to the dimensions of an element. We use this API to observe the child passed to `<MasonryItem />`. Every time the child's height changes, which is commonly caused by window resizing or zooming, these two properties, `grid-row-end` and `padding-bottom`, also get updated. `grid-row-end` changes so that the height of `<MasonryItem />`, by spanning a correct number of rows, matches its child's height. `padding-bottom` changes so that the vertical gap between `<MasonryItem />`s stays correct.
```

> If user wants to use the column spanning feature and therefore passes `columnSpan` prop to the component, the property `grid-column-end` is assined the given value. For example, if `columnSpan` is `3`, `grid-column-end` is set to `span 3` and the component will span three columns.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the developer wants to use the column spanning feature and so passes the `columnSpan` prop to the component, the property `grid-column-end` is assigned the given value. For example, if `columnSpan` is `3`, `grid-column-end` is set to `span 3` and the component will span three columns.
```

> If user wants to use server-side rendering and hence passes `defaultHeight` prop to the component, ResizeObserver API is not used so that the component, `<MasonryItem />`, is set to the given height and retains it. However, if `defaultHeight` is larger than the height of its child, there will be unwanted gap between the component and the child. If it is less, some parts of the child will not be displayed. Hence, the prop `defaultHeight` should be used with special attention to enjoy both benefits of a solid masonry and server-side rendering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the developer wants to use server-side rendering and so passes the `defaultHeight` prop to the component, the ResizeObserver API is not used so that the component, `<MasonryItem />`, is set to the given height and retains it. However, if `defaultHeight` is larger than the height of its child, there will be an unwanted gap between the component and the child. If it is less, some parts of the child will not be displayed. Hence, the prop `defaultHeight` should be used with special attention to enjoy the benefits of both a solid masonry and server-side rendering.
```

## Yet...Chrome hit us from the back

> After finishing up the implementation, we found that Chrome limits the number of rows of each CSS grid to 1,000 at the maximum. Overflowing items beyond the 1,000th row are simply squashed. You can find a thread with regard to this [here](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=688640).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
After finishing up the implementation, we found that Chrome limits the number of rows of each CSS grid to 1,000 at the maximum. Items overflowing beyond the 1,000th row are simply squashed. You can find a thread regarding this [here](https://bugs.chromium.org/p/chromium/issues/detail?id=688640).
```

> This is a serious problem for us because our implementation has the row height of `1px` and it is not that difficult for a masonry to go beyond a height of `1,000px`. As a hot fix, we set the row height to `2px`. So, your MUI Masonry will fail to be larger than `2,000px` on Chrome. It has no problem on Firefox or Safari, but since Chrome has the biggest market share of browsers, this definitely needs to be fixed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This is a serious problem for us because our implementation has the row height of `1px` and it is not that difficult for a masonry to go beyond a height of `1,000px`. As a hot fix, we set the row height to `2px`. So, your Masonry will fail to be larger than `2,000px` on Chrome. It has no problem on Firefox or Safari, but since Chrome has the biggest market share of browsers, this definitely needs to be fixed.
```

## Conclusion

The only way to resolve this issue is either for Chrome to remove such limitation or for us to move on to the second implementation: **CSS Flexbox + Configuring `order` of items**. However, before doing any of these, we wanted to gather feedback from our users first.

> You can find more about our new MUI Masonry component [here](https://next.material-ui.com/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience. I hope you enjoyed the article!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can find more about the new MUI Masonry component [here](https://mui.com/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have already prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience.

I hope you enjoyed the article!
```

> You can find more about the new MUI Masonry component [here](https://mui.com/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience. I hope you enjoyed the article!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find more about the new Masonry component [here](/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience. I hope you enjoyed the article!
```

> You can find more about the new MUI Masonry component [here](https://mui.com/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience. I hope you enjoyed the article!

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can find more about the new Masonry component [here](/components/masonry/). Also, here is an open [issue](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/issues/27934) with regard to this specific limitation of this masonry implementation. In fact, we already have prepared the second implementation [here](https://github.com/mui-org/material-ui/pull/28059). Please let us know your opinions and we will deliver for your best experience. I hope you enjoyed the article!
```
